# Hanuman Garhi Temple


| Hanuman Garhi Temple | |
|---|---|
| Religion | |
| Affiliation | Hinduism |
| District | Ayodhya |
| Deity | Hanuman |
| Festivals | Dussehra, Hanuman Jayanti, Bada Mangal, Ram Navami, Deepawali |
| Location | |
| State | Uttar Pradesh |
| Country | India |
| Architecture | |
| Completed | 10th Century |
| Website | |
| www |

**Hanuman Garhi Temple** is a Hindu temple of Hanuman in Uttar Pradesh, India. Located in Ayodhya, it is one of the most important temples in the city along with other temples such as Ram Mandir and Nageshwar Nath.[1] This shrine is under the charge of Bairagi Mahants of Ramanandi Sampradaya and Nirvani Akhara.

## History

[edit]Hanuman Garhi temple is located near Ram Janmabhoomi. According to Legend, after defeating Ravana when Lord Rama and Mata Sita along with Lord Hanuman returned to Ayodhya, the birthplace of Lord Rama, Lord Hanuman started living in a cave in Ayodhya to protect Ramkot.
According to the Skanda Purana, King Vikramaditya built Hanuman Garhi along with 360 other temples.
But Aurangzeb destroyed The Hanuman Garhi and built a Mosque.
Later, The Bairag occupied the land by defeating Nawab Shujauddula the King of Awadh. They removed the Mosque and built a new temple for Lord Hanuman. Some Muslims thought that Hanuman Garhi was built on a mosque. Therefore they tried to break the temple many times but failed. In 1855, the Nawab of Awadh granted land revenue to build the temple.[2][3] Historian Sarvepalli Gopal has said that the 1855 dispute was not for the Ayodhya temple dispute but for the Hanuman Garhi temple.[2]

## Architecture

[edit]Hanuman Garhi Temple is shaped like a four-sided fort with circular ramparts at each corner, housing shrines dedicated to the primary deity Hanuman. There are 76 stairs to reach the main temple, where the garbha griha, adorned with silver carvings, awaits. The central has three intricately designed doors leading to the inner chamber. Within, a 6-inch deity of Hanuman, depicted in his youthful (Bal) form, is positioned on the lap of his mother Anjani.[4] A silver tulsi garland, inscribed with the name of Rama is adorned by Hanuman. The verses of the Hanuman Chalisa are inscribed on the temple walls. The temple features a Victory Pillar, known as Vijay Stambh.[5]

## Festivals

[edit]## References

[edit]**^**Lutgendorf, Philip (11 January 2007).*Hanuman's Tale: The Messages of a Divine Monkey*. Oxford University Press. p. 244. ISBN 978-0-19-804220-4.- ^
**a**Dutta, Prabhash K (7 December 2017). "Ayodhya: When Wajid Ali Shah built Hanuman temple".**b***India Today*. Retrieved 28 July 2020. **^**Pillai, Manu S. (6 December 2017). "When a temple was besieged in Ayodhya".*Livemint*. Retrieved 29 July 2020.**^**"Hanuman Garhi | Ayodhya | UP Tourism".*www.ayodhya.gov.in*. Archived from the original on 5 July 2020. Retrieved 29 July 2020.**^**Shyam, Rai (15 March 2023). "Hanuman Garhi Ayodhya: Temple History | Significance| Architecture | Festivals | by Rai Shyam".*Utsav App: My Temple & Festivals*. Retrieved 10 November 2023.

## External links

[edit]- [1] - Utsav App Blog
- Hanumangarhi Temple Ayodhya – The Divine India
- Hanumangarhi Temple Ayodhya – The Prabhubhakti