# Welcome To Gold Canyon Arizona

Gold Canyon Arizona is a newer, well maintained unincorporated city in Pinal County about 45 minutes east of the Phoenix Sky Harbor airport. The area is considered by many as an upscale East Phoenix Valley community that has many affordable homes. Gold Canyon is adjacent to the Superstition Mountain Wilderness and at the foothills of Superstition Mountain, which offers thousands of square miles of public land for hiking, bike riding, photography, camping and other outdoor sports. There are five 18-hole championship length golf courses within Gold Canyon and dozens more within a 30 minute drive.

Many of the community’s homes have been built since about 2000. In recent years (2019+) there are some additional new developments that are being developed and built. If you are considering a move to the Gold Canyon Arizona area there are a variety of housing options for you to choose from. There is everything from very affordable priced single family homes; single level or two story homes, as well as condos. There are also custom built luxury homes in private gated communities. Some homes are priced in the low $300's, to others ranging upwards to more than $1+ million dollars.

The growth and development of the area has encouraged the building of commercial businesses which is less than ten minutes away. The development includes many national chain stores, such as Walmart, Kohls, Bed Bath & Beyond, as well as many others that are located off of Highway 60 at Signal Butte in Mesa, Arizona. Also located in that area are several restaurants, smaller shops, a major health club, and a movie theater. Located right in Gold Canyon are coffee shops, a few restaurants, banks, a grocery store, movie rental kiosks, a gas station, places of worship, medical facilities and many of the other services one needs to live comfortably day to day. There are medical doctors in Gold Canyon, alternative care providers, as well as major, nearby hospitals located less than 30 minutes away, with a couple only about 10 minutes away.

The community is made up of year round residents, as well as seasonal "snow-birds" who come to the Gold Canyon Arizona area to escape the snow and cold in the areas they migrate from. Gold Canyon weather is terrific with plenty of sunshine, no snowfall (except on the peaks of the Superstition Mountain), and beautiful days and nights filled with mild and hot temperatures. The 2010 census counted a population of 10,064, according to Wikipedia. But this number swells to about double the number in winter as "snow-birds"/and winter visitors come to enjoy the area.

The views of the Superstition Mountain, along with evening sunsets, makes Gold Canyon one of the most picturesque areas in all of Arizona. It is a great place to call home.

## Gold Canyon Arizona Business

Gold Canyon has a variety of small businesses that provide pretty much everything a person needs on a regular basis, from a grocery store, coffee shops, restaurants, dry cleaners, gas station, movie rental, etc --along with local medical providers and hospitals as close as about 10-15 minutes away. Additionally Gold Canyon is close to Apache Junction and Mesa where there are many additional businesses and restaurants, both small and national chains.

#### Gold Canyon Arizona Attractions

Gold Canyon offers a wide variety of activities and attractions: arts events, hiking, off road trails, spring baseball, museums and so much more. Golf is a popular Arizona activity. There are a variety of golf courses in and close to Gold Canyon - something for most every budget.

#### Gold Canyon Arizona Real Estate

Gold Canyon is a popular East Phoenix community about 45 minutes east of the Phoenix Sky Harbor airport, nestled at the foot of the picturesque Superstition Mountain. Homes are available in many price ranges, plus there are seasonal rentals for "snowbirds".

#### Gold Canyon Arizona Government

Gold Canyon is an unincorporated area located in Pinal County Arizona. Because Gold Canyon is unincorporated most services for the area are handled by Pinal County. But that said, there are a number of facilities that Gold Canyon utilizes that are in Apache Junction.